rosbag2 action record/replay support. (#5239)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data.rst

  request: []
  response: [{sum: 5}]

Managing Action Data
--------------------

1 Setup
^^^^^^^

You'll be recording action data between ``fibonacci_action_client`` and ``fibonacci_action_server``, then display and replay that same data later on.
To record action data between action client and server, ``Action Introspection`` must be enabled on the nodes.

Let's start ``fibonacci_action_client`` and ``fibonacci_action_server`` nodes and enable ``Action Introspection``.
You can see more details for :doc:`Action Introspection Demo <../../Demos/Action-Introspection>`.

Open a new terminal and run ``fibonacci_action_server``, enabling ``Action Introspection``:

.. code-block:: bash

>   ros2 run action_tutorials_py fibonacci_action_server --ros-args -p action_server_configure_introspection:=contents

Author: unintentionally used `action_tutorials_py` and `action_tutorials_cpp`, but that should be no problem 😅

> Open another terminal and run ``fibonacci_action_client``, enabling ``Action Introspection``:

Reviewer: Is it recommended to configure it in a single location?
```suggestion
Or open another terminal and run ``fibonacci_action_client``, enabling ``Action Introspection``:
```

Author: there should not be `Or` here, because user needs to open the another terminal to execute the action client.

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 run action_tutorials_cpp fibonacci_action_client --ros-args -p action_client_configure_introspection:=contents

2 Check action availability
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``ros2 bag`` can only record data from available actions.
To see the list of your system's actions, open a new terminal and run the command:

.. code-block:: console

  $ ros2 action list
  /fibonacci

> To check if ``Action Introspection`` is enabled on the action client and service, run the command:

Reviewer: If configure only the action server or the action client, the "and" should be changed to "or."

```suggestion
To check if ``Action Introspection`` is enabled on the action client or service, run the command:
```

.. code-block:: console

  $ ros2 action echo --flow-style /fibonacci
  interface: GOAL_SERVICE
  info:
    event_type: REQUEST_SENT
    stamp:
      sec: 1744917904
      nanosec: 760683446
    client_gid: [1, 15, 165, 231, 234, 109, 65, 202, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 19, 4]
    sequence_number: 1
  request: [{goal_id: {uuid: [81, 55, 121, 145, 81, 66, 209, 93, 214, 113, 255, 100, 120, 6, 102, 83]}, goal: {order: 10}}]
  response: []
  ---
  ...

3 Record actions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To record action data, the following options are supported.
Action data can be recorded with topics and services at the same time.

To record specific actions:

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 bag record --action <action_names>

To record all actions:

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 bag record --all-actions

Run the command:

.. code-block:: console

  $ ros2 bag record --action /fibonacci

>   root@tomoyafujita:~/ros2_ws/colcon_ws# ros2 bag record --action /fibonacci

Reviewer 2: Looks like this line is a duplicate of the line above:

```suggestion
```

(The formatting of the user + host + CWD looks good, though :smile:)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/520fe581-6970-4fb9-bf05-455e253b7bf9)

Author: omg... thanks!

  [INFO] [1744953225.214114862] [rosbag2_recorder]: Press SPACE for pausing/resuming
  [INFO] [1744953225.218369761] [rosbag2_recorder]: Listening for topics...
  [INFO] [1744953225.218386223] [rosbag2_recorder]: Event publisher thread: Starting
  [INFO] [1744953225.218580294] [rosbag2_recorder]: Recording...
  [INFO] [1744953225.725417634] [rosbag2_recorder]: Subscribed to topic '/fibonacci/_action/cancel_goal/_service_event'
  [INFO] [1744953225.727901848] [rosbag2_recorder]: Subscribed to topic '/fibonacci/_action/feedback'
  [INFO] [1744953225.729655213] [rosbag2_recorder]: Subscribed to topic '/fibonacci/_action/get_result/_service_event'
  [INFO] [1744953225.731315612] [rosbag2_recorder]: Subscribed to topic '/fibonacci/_action/send_goal/_service_event'
  [INFO] [1744953225.735061252] [rosbag2_recorder]: Subscribed to topic '/fibonacci/_action/status'
  ...

> Now ``ros2 bag`` is recording the action data published on the ``/fibonacci`` action.

Reviewer 2: Just something to consider, not required:

We know it's just feedback messages + goal & result services underneath, but I'm wondering if "_published_" is the right terminology here. The [actions concepts article](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Concepts/Basic/About-Actions.html) doesn't mention "publishing" and neither does the [services concepts article](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Concepts/Basic/About-Services.html) (but the [topics one](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Concepts/Basic/About-Topics.html) obviously does). It's all about sending a goal, receiving feedback, and then receiving the result.

Maybe something like this, just to avoid using the "publishing" word and specify what's being recorded:

```suggestion
Now ``ros2 bag`` is recording the action data for the ``/fibonacci`` action: goal, result, and feedback.
```

Author: yeah agree, i will go ahead to borrow your suggestion here.

To stop the recording, enter ``Ctrl+C`` in the terminal.

The data will be accumulated in a new bag directory with a name in the pattern of ``rosbag2_year_month_day-hour_minute_second``.
This directory will contain a ``metadata.yaml`` along with the bag file in the recorded format.

4 Inspect action data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You can see details about your recording by running:
> 
> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>   ros2 bag info <bag_file_name>
> 
> Running this command will return a list of information on the file:
> 
> .. code-block:: console
> 
>   Files:             rosbag2_2025_04_17-22_20_40_0.mcap

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestion, since the service section was updated to this just recently: https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data.html#inspect-service-data

```suggestion
You can see details about your recording by running:

.. code-block:: console

  $ ros2 bag info <bag_file_name>
  Files:             rosbag2_2025_04_17-22_20_40_0.mcap
```

  Bag size:          20.7 KiB
  Storage id:        mcap
  ROS Distro:        rolling
  Duration:          9.019568080s
  Start:             Apr 17 2025 22:20:47.263125070 (1744953647.263125070)
  End:               Apr 17 2025 22:20:56.282693150 (1744953656.282693150)
  Messages:          0
  Topic information:
  Services:          0
  Service information:
  Actions:           1
  Action information:
    Action: /fibonacci | Type: example_interfaces/action/Fibonacci | Topics: 2 | Service: 3 | Serialization Format: cdr
      Topic: feedback | Count: 9
      Topic: status | Count: 3
      Service: send_goal | Event Count: 4
      Service: cancel_goal | Event Count: 0
      Service: get_result | Event Count: 4

5 Play action data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Before replaying the bag file, enter ``Ctrl+C`` in the terminal where ``fibonacci_action_client`` is running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before replaying the bag file, enter :kbd:`Ctrl-C` in the terminal where ``fibonacci_action_client`` is running.
```

When ``fibonacci_action_client`` stops running, ``fibonacci_action_server`` also stops printing the result because there are no incoming requests.

> Replaying the service data from the bag file will start sending the requests to ``fibonacci_action_server``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replaying the action data from the bag file will start sending the requests to ``fibonacci_action_server``.
```

Enter the command:

.. code-block:: bash

>     ros2 bag play --publish-service-requests <bag_file_name>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ros2 bag play --send-actions-as-client <bag_file_name>
```

Author: good eye, thanks!

> Enter the command:
> 
> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>     ros2 bag play --send-actions-as-client <bag_file_name>
> 
> The terminal will return the message:
> 
> .. code-block:: console
> 
>   [INFO] [1744953720.691068674] [rosbag2_player]: Set rate to 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enter the command:

.. code-block:: console

  $ ros2 bag play --send-actions-as-client <bag_file_name>
  [INFO] [1744953720.691068674] [rosbag2_player]: Set rate to 1
```

  [INFO] [1744953723.817876426] [fibonacci_action_server]: Feedback: array('i', [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5])
  [INFO] [1744953724.818498515] [fibonacci_action_server]: Feedback: array('i', [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8])
  [INFO] [1744953725.819182228] [fibonacci_action_server]: Feedback: array('i', [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13])
  [INFO] [1744953726.820032562] [fibonacci_action_server]: Feedback: array('i', [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21])
  [INFO] [1744953727.820738690] [fibonacci_action_server]: Feedback: array('i', [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34])
  [INFO] [1744953728.821449308] [fibonacci_action_server]: Feedback: array('i', [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55])

This is because ``ros2 bag play`` sends the action goal request data from the bag file to the ``/fibonacci`` action.

We can also introspect action communication as ``ros2 bag play`` is playing it back to verify the ``fibonacci_action_server``.

Run this command before ``ros2 bag play`` to see the ``fibonacci_action_server``:

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 action echo --flow-style /fibonacci

You can see the action goal request from the bag file and the service response from  ``fibonacci_action_server``.

> .. code-block:: console

Author: probably too long to show here? it would be better if we can fold the console output.
